# Human In The Loop System Design when Operating in Extreme Environments
When I think about this problem, my mind quickly turns to the lunar surface and the next Lunar Terrain Vehicle for NASA. This vehicle is expected to be able to survive and operate autonomously and semi autonomously for 3 years on the lunar surface before astronauts arrive. Once astronauts arrive, the vehicle shall be capable of letting them control the system with driver assist capabilities. Finally, the astronauts should also have the capability of overriding all potential autonomy when necessary. This platform and environment is a great scenario for considering the "Highly Autonomous System" scenario.

## Understanding the Failure Modes and What Failing Safely Means
The primary failure modes when you think of interplanetary systems are plentiful. First and foremost is power. The vehicle needs to keep itself alive on the surface whether that be prioritizing charging or reducing power consumption. Next, losing consistent communications channels. Depending on where your mission takes place, you will have different reliability in your communications coupled with the transmission and reception delay (~3 seconds). These are considered environmental state failure modes. Next you have system failure modes such as sensor failure, perception failure, localization failure, and control failure. On the lunar surface, sensors are subjected to ionoized radiation which can cause sensor quality to degrade or become compeletly disabled over time. Perception failure can occur from the feature scarce environment making it hard to predict the surface terrain and navigate safely around craters (negative relief) and avoid rocks (positive reliefs). Localization failure occurs when you no longer have confidence about where you are relative to other surface assets and what steps are necessary to regain trust in your location. Then, there is control failure which occurs because the lunar surface, with its 1/6th gravity and loose, potentially hollow, regolith surface, has hard to predict dynamics.

With all of these failure modes, NASA is incredibly concerned about what failing safely means. With regards to environmental mode failures, this becomes a optimization problem. Failure should always lead to vehicle health being preserved. If communications are ever lost, the system must make decisions that maximize its ability to stay charged, even though that may sacrifice communications channels or overall task completion percentage. However, when astronauts are added into the loop of the system, the system must change its behavior to do everything that is absolutely necessary to keep the astronauts alive and mobile. As you can see, these two different failure modes imply an extremely sophisticated chain of commands. With regards to system failure modes during autonomous/semi-autonomous operation, the system is responsible for maintaining an up to date health vector that describes the current state of all sensors and acutators. This helps humans teleoperate the vehicle with some level of confidence that it is capable of navigating within its flight envelope. As the vehicles capabilities degrade over time due to radiation, dust uptake, and normal wear and tear of the vehicle, the system must constrain its operational envelope and provide restricted commanding to teleoperaters. Luckily the Lunar Terrain Vehicle doesn't have to contend with traffic on the lunar surface. However, the uncertainty in surface dynamics and terrain classification leads to the requirement of always having a safe abort option when exploring unpredictable terrain.

## The Autonomy Boundary: What Can and Cant be Automated
When designing a system such as this, everything is driven by requirements that are agreed upon by multiple parties. In this thought exercise, I will disregard that fact and provide an aggressive, autonomous approach to this system. There is one primary concern before we can discuss the automation levels. Because the environment is unpredictable and impossible to get to, I make the assumption that upon delivery, the vehicle is closely monitored by teleoperaters on Earth to safely navigate and map a large swath around its delivery vessel. By performing this operation first, the vehicle is now equipped with a safe region on the surface where it can confidently return to home. With this assumption out of the way, lets discuss what parts of the system can be automated. One primary automated task would be power consumption management. This system needs to know absolutely everything about its state of charge. It needs to be capable of dynamically powering on and off components to optimize vehicle health. You can think of this as "fight or flight", the vehicle must do whatever is necessary to survive on the lunar surface because there is no one up there to fix the vehicle. Additionally, the vehicle must also factor in communication quality as to prevent loss of signal (LoS) to Earth. These two capabilities need to be automated. If a global blackout happens on Earth, the vehicle must attempt to stay alive until it is contacted again by operators on Earth. 

Now for the gray area of autonomous operation on the moon. Here we start to consider its ability to explore beyond its prediscovered safe space. Navigation on the lunar surface requires maintaining confident localization as to not become "Lost in Space". Losing your location on the lunar surface while astronaut assets are on the moon could lead to loss of life. Therefore, localization confidence metrics must be defined and obeyed by the system. Similarly, the system must provide navigation confidence metrics that fully define its understanding of the terrain (post and negative relief) and the surface quality. These two metrics can then be used to autonomously trigger stop/request user input conditions. Additionaly, when terrain is detected outside the operational envelope capabilities of the vehicle, it should request explicit override from a user to attempt traversal.

The ironic part of this system, however, is when astronauts are not present on the lunar surface, the vehicle should actually have the capability of overriding all incoming commands to prevent itself from becoming inoperable. This functionality can be represented as the autonomous return to home functionality. In this case, the system is able to override the human operator.

## Trust and Latency: How to Interact with Remote Users During Comms Loss
When communication degrades and your 3 seconds lag becomes 10, 20, 100 second communications loss, how should the vehicle telemetry present itself to prevent operators from making rash and reactive decisions. Before we discuss the best way to handle this, we must first assume that their is a clear ageement between vehicle and operator that defines when Loss of Signal occurs. This assumption allows us to then discuss system response after LoS. When data is delayed, there is onus on the vehicle and the ground station (or remote viewer) software to keep operators informed and prepared for incoming telemetry. On the vehicle side, the first thing that should be returned to the user is the vehicle health state. Ideally, the ground station software will prepare the user for expected values based on system models to prevent the user from becoming overwhelmed with checking all the data individually. Ergonomic color coding should be associated with all health fields. Next, the vehicle should identify where it thinks it has moved relative to the location it was when loss of signal occurred. This can be accompanied by forward facing or birds eye view images around the vehicle to understand current operational limitations and conditions. These two pieces of information are enough to allow a remote user to quickly assess the system and make decisions about the next best action.

Some supplimentary information could also be collected. The system should keep a running log of attempted tasks in a format that has been agreed upon with operators with sub tasks such as explore, recharge, find comms, hibernate. The system should keep track of anamolies experienced during communication blackouts. These should be ranked in order of importance and only the major ones need to be transmitted in the early phases of communications recovery. The system could present the user with a list of proposed actions to quickly allow the user to regain operational understanding of the system. This could also be provided for recovering from anamolous conditions as well. 

In response to this question without reference to my particular example, I think the best way to help human operators during times of communications uncertainty is to simplify the system telemtry as much as possible and have a clearly defined autonomous capability envelope for the platform. The simplified telemetry quickly informs operators of system state and operational capability. Where as, the autonomy envelope provides users with a solid understanding of what to expect when communications are reestablished. The question then remains, what happens when everything goes wrong. Ideally, your autonomy system is robust and cautious to prevent putting itself in this position. However, for the sake of completeness, lets assume the telemetry comes back and the vehicle is in a dark cavern. Again the vehicle health telemetry (including IMU measurements) and vehicle surrounding images (with potentially automated lighting) will be the first indicator of failure. As the operator, there will be no immediate reaction required as a condition like this involves precise recovery actions to prevent vehicle loss. Therefore, I need to find a particular example that requires rapid response. Lets assume the vehicle is out of control, and barreling toward a cliff when the operator regains telemtry, how can we manage the cognitive load? In this circumstance, I think we need to invision an abort all movement button. This button is gauranteed to bring the vehicle to a safe stop. This button is integrated into the autonomy capabilities and is the pull chord for the entire system. I think this would be the required third component provided to the operator at all times.

## Summary
