The specific case of human-in-the-loop for highly autonomous systems that has recently come up is the Waymo cars. Specifically, they can consult humans, particularly from the Philippines, who can provide guidance to the car when it’s confused or stuck. There was some confusion/misinformation about exactly what happens, with some people mistaking it for humans taking over the actual driving controls to drive the car out of the situation, which could be a huge problem due to legalities and the latency of driving in another country. While Waymo obviously doesn’t release full details, human guidance is strictly limited to high-level decisions. Actual low-level control to drive the vehicle is not allocated to the human supervisors due to the high latency (typically 300-500 milliseconds) of remote communication. Instead, supervisors provide abstract path suggestions or commands (e.g., “treat that object as a temporary hazard”). Examples of these non-driving high-level decisions include: 
1. Ambiguous Object Identification: Determining if an unfamiliar stationary object (like debris or a unique sign) is a temporary hazard or a permanent obstruction. 
2. Complex Maneuver Guidance: Providing a safe path in low-confidence scenarios, such as navigating a parking lot with faded lines. 
3. Route Refinement: Clarifying the appropriate action for an ambiguous destination. 
Overall, I’d argue that this style of human-in-the-loop guidance is a good thing.


In the case of connection issues, autonomous systems, such as self-driving systems, should have a default policy to stop at a safe location (e.g., a parking spot without interrupting traffic), alert passengers, and, ideally, refund them. While this may be inconvenient for the company and the drivers, it’s better than the alternative of widespread disruptions caused by the connection issue, as well as potential accidents from operating it completely autonomously without supervision. [1](https://sfstandard.com/2025/12/23/wtf-happened-waymo-blackout-industry-experts-have-guesses/)  There was a recent incident with Waymo’s failure during the middle of a blackout, jamming traffic as a specific example of this. There hadn’t been any major blackouts in the last 22 years, so they were likely unprepared for this to happen (not that it excuses them), and their default policy seems to have simply been to stop in place, which in this case isn’t terrible, as it’s not like they started causing collisions with other cars just because of the blackout. However, in a more serious situation, such as an earthquake, it could be much more dangerous and disruptive, especially for first responders.

One way these systems can expand their autonomy is through thorough testing across different tasks/scenarios. Quantitatively measuring the system's reliability through these tests allows us to be more confident in its capability to execute them with minimal issues. For example, how often the car successfully handles foggy weather, and how often it makes a dangerous decision instead. This would give us an expectation of how reliable it could be in real-world foggy weather, and allow informed, reliable decisions to be made about whether it is allowed to navigate in this situation. An issue could be at what point do we consider them reliable enough, one way this could be done is by measuring human performance on the same problem, and comparing the autonomous systems performance to that of the humans, after all, if you can trust another human at the same task, then a human-level autonomous system at the same task would logically be a fairly trustworthy (outside of extenuating circumstances that might not be present in the models training, which is theoretically why the HITL is present to make high-level decisions).

In the worst-case scenario, if the previous methods weren’t able to mitigate it and the autonomous system enters a dangerous situation without a human in the loop, information overload could occur as the situation fully develops. This can be due to various things, like having too much information to consider, such as having to figure out the speeds and distances and observation readings, or simply that the situation requires immediate decision-making. In these cases, the system should try to include suggestions the human can choose from if it’s genuinely that bad an emergency, such as having to drive into the highway median. While this is certainly not ideal, it yields a better result than the worst-case outcome, especially if the situation is too complex for a human to provide good or detailed directions. One thing to consider is when these suggestions are needed versus when it’s better to let the supervisor provide more detailed responses. The obvious example is when the car’s speed is very high, and the situation evolves very quickly. Another factor could be how often a sensor or multiple sensors change, which could overload the human, preventing them from quickly interpreting what’s happening in the scene. Lastly, it may be needed when a quick decision must be made, such as in emergency services.

Overall, while our current autonomous systems aren’t the most reliable systems, having a human-in-the-loop is very important to deal with out-of-distribution events that could otherwise lead to problems, and it is important to have backup systems in case of any events that might otherwise prevent the human from being able to give guidance to the system to prevent any potential accidents or disasters.

[1] https://sfstandard.com/2025/12/23/wtf-happened-waymo-blackout-industry-experts-have-guesses/
